He wrote about one-quarter of the Christian Greek scriptures.
That's almost as much as the Apostle Paul.
His name is only mentioned three times,
and there are scarcely four words that are used to describe him.
The physician Luke is one of the most familiar names of whom we know almost nothing about.
In a world of people trying to look important,
Luke shows us what is important.
Let's see what we can learn from the physician Luke.
The first mention of him, the first description of Luke,
is found in the book of Colossians chapter 3, verse 14,
and the Apostle Paul describes him there as the beloved physician.
Physician, we focused on that when we considered the gospel of Luke,
Luke uses medical terms as he writes.
But Luke was more than just a physician by occupation.
Luke was a physician in spirit.
He had the heart of a physician, the heart of a healer.
Let's look at an example.
Turn with me, please, to the book of Luke chapter 4.
Luke 4 verses 38 and 39.
38 says, after leaving the synagogue,
he, that's Jesus, entered into Simon's home.
Now Simon's mother-in-law was suffering from a high fever.
And they asked him to help her.
So he stood over her and rebuked the fever and it left her instantly.
She got up and began ministering to them.
There we have a mention in verse 38, Luke noted that she had a high fever.
But look a little closer.
What made an impression on Luke?
Was it just the high fever?
The verse says, Simon's mother-in-law was suffering with a high fever.
Matthew didn't say that, Mark didn't say that.
Luke noticed.
Look at another example.
Luke 22, verse 44.
Luke 22, 44.
The account is in the Garden of Gethsemane and Jesus was there praying.
But notice what Luke wrote, what caught his attention, verse 44.
But he was in such agony that he kept praying more earnestly and his sweat became as drops of blood.
Falling to the ground, the physician Luke noticed the condition
that his sweat became as drops of blood.
But look again, it says that he was in such agony that his sweat became as drops of blood.
Jesus conditioned his agony is what caught Luke's attention, not just the physical condition, the medical condition.
You see, Luke records Jesus as someone who saw men as they were.
He saw men without distinction.
He saw men and he loved them all.
Luke shows Jesus as someone whose heart goes out to everyone for whom life is an unequal struggle.
That made an impression on Luke.
Think of Luke's gospel, the things that are uniquely recorded in Luke.
It's only Luke who tells us about the aged Elizabeth Sinzekeriah.
Luke tells us about Anna in Simeon.
Luke tells us about the widow of name, the woman bent over for 18 years.
The woman who anointed the feet of Jesus with her tears, the Samaritan leper, the rich tax collectors of chaos, the condemned thief who hung beside Jesus.
Those Jesus added to towards these people appealed to Luke.
And part of me, Luke shared Jesus' view.
For Luke too, men of all sorts are in the embrace of God's mercy.
And this attitude of heart and mind made Luke be loved, the beloved physician.
And note out that spirit reduced the friction amongst those who were traveling with Paul in preaching in the first century.
Now, the second description of Luke is found in Philemon, verse 24.
And there, Luke is described as a fellow worker.
Open with me the book of Acts, Acts chapter 16.
And we'll read beginning in verse 8, Acts chapter 16 and verse 8.
It says, so they, this is Paul, Timothy, Silas, and his traveling companions,
they passed by Misia and came down to Troas.
And that's where Paul had the vision and he was told to step over into Macedonia.
And look at verse 10.
As soon as he, that's Paul had seen the vision, we tried to go into Macedonia.
Verse 11 says, so we put out to see from Troas.
Here's our introduction to the book of Luke.
Luke never praises himself. He never writes about himself.
We only trace Luke's travels with Paul by the change of a pronoun from they to we.
Now, this was in the second missionary tour that Paul, Luke joined.
Paul here at Troas and he traveled on to Philippi with him.
And look at what make Luke a fellow worker. Look at what we can learn from him.
This is in verse 13 when they arrived in Philippi.
Verse 13 says, on the Sabbath day, we went outside the gate beside a river where we thought there was a place of prayer.
And we sat down and began speaking to the woman, women who had assembled.
And this now is the account of Lydia, where Lydia embraces the truth, the kingdom message.
But did you notice? It said, we went outside. Luke went with them.
It said, we thought there was a place of prayer.
Luke was involved in the thinking process, in the discussion, in the decision about where to go.
And Luke was involved in speaking to them.
Luke was a participant, not simply along for the ride, not a fellow traveler, not just a chronicler.
Luke was a fellow worker.
And there's a beautiful lesson for us and for you.
Be a participant.
Be an example. Get involved in the assignments you are given.
Now, it may be that Luke stayed in Philippi from 50 to 56.
We don't know, but perhaps he did, because he joined Paul again in 56 CE on the third missionary to a from Philippi.
What did he do in Philippi? We don't really know.
Typically, it's quiet about Luke.
But we can assume he must have just been a busy fellow worker there in Philippi.
No sparks flying, just a busy fellow worker.
He joined Paul again from 56, from Philippi. He traveled with him to Jerusalem.
He was in Jerusalem for the trouble in the temple.
He traveled with in Cessaria, where Paul was a prisoner.
And continued on with Paul to Rome, where Paul was a prisoner.
Luke, however, was not a prisoner, but he accompanied Paul.
How comforting that must have been for Paul to have his fellow worker with him.
When you think about Paul, his countless beatings, the scourging, the stoning, the shipwrecks,
they must have all taken a toll on him physically, not to mention the thorn and the flesh he had to deal with.
One of his traveling companions was Timothy with frequent cases of sickness.
How relieved they must have been to have Luke the physician with them.
So Luke is an example of long continued devotion to the kingdom work
and of unshaken constancy to Paul and his associates.
And in fact, this warm feeling of a fellow worker, Luke being a fellow worker,
is perhaps the best summed up in the final mention of Luke.
And that's in second Timothy 4, verse 11.
Among Paul's final words, he says,
Luke alone is with me of all his fellow workers.
Perhaps there were none dearer or few dearer than Luke.
You see, Luke's writing contained the least possible mention of himself.
Yet we do not doubt that he was eminently useful to Paul and to all those around him
to be sure he enabled Paul to do much more than would have otherwise been possible for him.
He kept himself out of sight.
In his gospel, it is Christ that shines.
In the book of Acts, it's the kingdom preaching work that shines.
And I wonder if the silence in the scriptures in direct reference to Luke's intentional.
It certainly teaches us something.
Few other so prominent servants have so little mention
and therein lies the lesson from the life of Luke.
Be an example of a servant who with lowlyness of mind finds your service in serving others.
There was already one Paul, Luke stays in the background.
With the spirit of a true servant, he did not need the light of publicity to stimulate him.
He was not the machine.
He was the oil.
Finally, if the only three words used to describe you
are beloved fellow worker, your training here at Gilead will have been a success.
And you, like Luke, will be oiled to machinery.